add detailed design, how we teach, and alternatives (#4)
tomdale/rfcs: text/0000-tracked-properties.md

### Native Classes

Tracked properties are designed from the ground up for native JavaScript (ES6)
classes. Adopting them will make it easier to convert away from the aging Ember

> object-model, and

Reviewer: Missing conclusion here?

## Detailed design

### Autotracking Stack

Autotracking works by taking advantage of the fact that all mutable properties
will be decorated by `tracked`. This decorator adds a getter and a setter that
wraps the property, be it a tracked getter or a tracked simple property. Every
time we activate a tracked getter, it creates a global stack before it begins
executing the getter's code, and as it executes, any other tracked wrappers
that run add themselves to the stack.

This example demonstrates how this method works, but is simplified to only work

> with tracked getters, and to only track keys. It uses the stage 2 decorator

Reviewer: Not sure if enough people are familiar with decorators (and specifically how you implement a decorator) to make this example improve overall clarity? Maybe there's some pseudocode or a simplified example using just functions? I want to understand the takeaway people should have from this example that they don't get from the prose.

Author: I think I can redo this using just `Object.defineProperty` manually. The main thing is that this is a tricky concept, it uses a form of recursion, kind of, and private global state to keep track of things. I think this is hard to describe in prose for people who are unfamiliar with the concepts, and a solid example with working code really will help to clarify for those readers

syntax.

```js
let PROPERTY_STACK;

function tracked({ key, descriptor }) {
  let originalGet = descriptor.get;

  descriptor.get = function() {
    // store the stack from the previous getter, if it exists
    let previousStack = PROPERTY_STACK;

    // create a new stack
    PROPERTY_STACK = [];

    // call the original get function to get the value
    let value = originalGet.call(this);

    // At this point, PROPERTY_STACK will contain all of the keys of any values
    // that were marked as tracked and accessed when `originalGet` was called.
    // We can use this knowledge to setup our change tracking, then push our
    // own key and the current stack into the previous stack if it exists.
    if (previousStack) {
      previousStack.push(key, ...PROPERTY_STACK);
    }

    PROPERTY_STACK = previousStack;

    return value;
  }
}
```

Of course, tracking keys would only work if we knew the full paths, or were only
concerned with only changes to the current object. The real implementation uses
[Glimmer VM's internal validators](https://github.com/glimmerjs/glimmer-vm/blob/master/guides/05-validators.md)
to track changes to properties.

> As properties are accessed, their validation  _tags_ are pushed on the stack,

Reviewer: I'm worried that this section goes into too much detail, and opens up topics that would be difficult to cover properly in this RFC. Specifically, I'm worried that too much implementation detail will cause people to be more confused, vs. higher level language that captures the overall idea without requiring the reader to understand tags/validators etc.

That said, it's understandable that people will be skeptical here if it seems like too much magic. Would love your thoughts on how to strike the right balance.

Reviewer: Or maybe we just do need to go into a deeper level of detail in other sections, specifically covering tags, invalidations, etc.

and when the property access is complete these tags are combined into a single
tag for that property. Setters are added to tracked getters and tracked simple
properties as appropriate which manually dirty these tags whenever they are
activated, and subsequently invalidate all of the tags for any getters which
ever accessed them.

### Untracked Properties

Revisiting the `middleName` bug from earlier, you may notice that it's still
possible for a new developer to introduce a bug with tracked properties. What if
they don't know that all mutable properties must be tracked? This would fail,
just like our previous example:

```js
import { tracked } from '@ember/object';

class Person {
  @tracked firstName = 'Tom';
  @tracked lastName = 'Dale';
  middleName = 'Tomster';

  @tracked
  get fullName() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.middleName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
```

The last piece of the puzzle here will be a development time only assertion.
When you access _untracked_ properties from an a tracked getter, we will install

> something similar to the mandatory setter function. This will throw an error if

Reviewer: May want to link to something here (maybe even the code where it's implemented). Not sure how many readers will know what a "mandatory setter" is.

the user ever tries to set the property, effectively making it immutable.

> To accomplish this, we can wrap any object which has tracked properties with a

Reviewer: At what boundar(y|ies) does this wrapping happen?

Author: Discussing this right now, but basically I think

1. Whenever a class is marked with `@tracked`, it gets wrapped in a proxy (we can use finishers to do this I believe)
2. Whenever a proxied object accesses and returns a property which is _also_ an object, it will wrap that object in another proxy. This means that all accesses from a tracked context will be wrapped in proxies, no matter how many layers deep.

native [`Proxy`][proxy], which will subsequently wrap any objects or array properties
which are accessed with another proxy, and so on. These proxies will be able
to check if any untracked properties are being accessed from an tracked context,
and setup immutable assertions if so.

### Tracked Interop with Computed Properties and `Ember.set`

Tracked properties work well in isolation. In systems built from the ground up
using `@tracked`, all mutable values will be marked as tracked, so autotracking
will be able to "watch" them all as they are accessed and changed.

However, tracked properties will have to interoperate with the current system
for tracking changes and mutable state in Ember for some time as the community
transitions forward. The origin of all mutations in the old system is through
`Ember.set` (or more specifically, `notifyPropertyChange`), but there are many
ways to listen to these changes. Tracked properties are concerned with two
specific cases:

1. **Computed Properties.** When `notifyPropertyChange` is called on one of a

> computeds dependencies, it will invalidate, and invalidate any computeds which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
computed property's dependencies, it will invalidate, and invalidate any computed properties which
```

depend on it. In this way, one call to `set` can invalidate many properties in
the system. Tracked properties must also properly invalidate if they consume
any of these properties.
2. **Ember.set() directly**. If a tracked property accesses a simple, untracked
property which is _later_ set with `Ember.set()`, it must have a way to know
that this property has changed. This can occur in services, helper classes which
have not yet converted to `@tracked`, and in many other edge cases.

In the case of computed properties, we have all the information we need up front
to allow tracked getters to watch for changes in the computed. They will notify
whenever they are updated, so the same technique which is used for the autotrack
stack can be used to watch them as well. Crucially, computed properties will
always have a tag due to the fact that they are defined explicitly in class
definitions, which means we have something to watch the very first time a
computed property is accessed.

> In the edge case of non-computed, non-tracked property access, this is not the

Reviewer: Two things here:

1. I don't think non-computed, non-tracked is really an edge case—it's quite common in most apps. Calling it an edge case here might raise some hackles, and it's not important to our argument how edge-y or not it is.
2. To me, the important aspect isn't "whether it has a tag," which is kind of orthogonal, but about whether the system _knows about/can intercept_ the property. Even if it didn't have a validator assigned, trapping unknown property access would be enough, if the language supported that capability.

case. The property may be completely undecorated, meaning it may never have had
a tag in the first place. With standard Javascript property access, we won't
have an opportunity to _add_ a tag either. Autotrack will not work in these
cases:

```js
const Config = Service.extend({
  polling: {
    shouldPoll: false,
    pollInterval: -1,
  },

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    fetch('config/api/url')
      .then(r => r.json())
      .then(polling => set(this, 'polling', polling));
  }
})

class SomeComponent extends Component {
  @service config;

  @tracked
  get pollInterval() {

>     // When we access shouldPoll and pollInterval, they don't have tags or

Reviewer: As above, it's more about whether we have some way of capturing this property access, rather than whether the property has a tag associated with it.

    // wrapped getters. We have no idea that they could update in the future.
    let { shouldPoll, pollInterval } = this.config.polling;

    return shouldPoll ? pollInterval : -1;
  }
}
```

To support this case, `Ember.get` will manually opt in to adding the tags for
any properties which are accessed during a tracked getter. This allows tracked
getters to safely access services and objects which are still using the legacy
change tracking system:

```js
const Config = Service.extend({
  polling: {
    shouldPoll: false,
    pollInterval: -1,
  },

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    fetch('config/api/url')
      .then(r => r.json())
      .then(polling => set(this, 'polling', polling));
  }
})

class SomeComponent extends Component {
  @service config;

  @tracked
  get pollInterval() {
    // When we access shouldPoll and pollInterval, they don't have tags or
    // wrapped getters. We have no idea that they could update in the future.

>     let shouldPoll = this.get('config.polling.shouldPoll');

Reviewer: Should probably use the function form of `get`, since we don't intend for the Glimmer `Component` base class to have a `get()` method on it.

    let pollInterval = this.get('config.polling.pollInterval');

    return shouldPoll ? pollInterval : -1;
  }
}
```

> This solution will _only_ be necessary in cases where users do not know ahead of

Reviewer: I think we should make it clear that this is only needed for addons that need to support older apps. The correct thing to do in the majority of cases is simply annotate the mutated, non-computed property with `@tracked`.

Because of this, I think we should present the `tracked()` functionality from below first, and present the `get()` workaround as an alternative for addon authors that need to handle third-party objects.

time whether a property is A. immutable, B. tracked, or C. a computed property.
As time goes on and more and more services, addons, and apps are converted to
`@tracked`, the need for `Ember.get` will become smaller and smaller, until it
can be removed from the framework entirely (along with `Ember.set`).

### Computed Property Interop with Tracked

The previous section covers the cases where classic Ember properties are
accessed from tracked properties, but we also have to define the behavior for
when the opposite occurs: tracked properties are accessed by from a classic
context.

There are two major ways this can occur:

1. Computed Properties
2. Observers

Observers are strictly within the old paradigm, so tracked properties will _not_

> attempt to interoperate with them. Using `Ember.set` on a tracked property will

Reviewer: Kind of a nitpick, but using the `Ember.set` notation is kind of strange given that we're moving people away from the `Ember` global. Should maybe define this early in the document as "Ember's `set()` function (exported from the `@ember/object` module)", then just use `set()` rather than `Ember.set()` throughout.

Author: Yeah I wish there was an easy standard way to inline refer to a module and export. Will update.

still notify that the property has updated, and any observers for that property
will fire accordingly.

Computed properties, on the other hand, are similar enough to tracked properties
that interoperability would be useful. As such, computed properties will _also_
automatically add tracked properties to their dependencies as they are accessed.
This will use the same mechanism as tracked properties do with the autotrack
stack, and will allow users to progressively convert from computed properties to
tracked properties over time by whittling away at the explicit dependencies
within a CP.

### Interop with EmberObject

While `@tracked` is designed from the ground up for native Javascript classes,
it will have to interoperate with legacy code for some time. In the previous
sections, we noted how `get` would have to be used with any legacy code which
has not been updated to tracked properties. As such, to make the transition as
easy as possible, `tracked` will also be made to work with the classic

> object-model:

Reviewer: s/object-model/object model/

```js
const Config = Service.extend({
  polling: tracked({
    value: {
      shouldPoll: false,
      pollInterval: -1,
    }
  }),

  init() {
    this._super(...arguments);

    fetch('config/api/url')
      .then(r => r.json())

>       .then(polling => set(this, 'polling', polling));

Reviewer: One selling point about `tracked()` here is that you can actually drop the call to `set()` and just use `this.polling = polling`. I think we can sell `tracked()` here not as a sop to compatibility but an exciting improvement in its own right that allows us to finally get rid of `this.set()`, just like how we got rid of `this.get()`.

Author: Totally agree, we should emphasize this first and foremost. I think this example should still be included to show how backwards compatibility works when users _don't_ have control of the service.

tracked properties?

### General Usage

The mental model with tracked properties is that anything _mutable_ should be
tracked. If a value will ever change, it should have the `@tracked` decorator
attached to it.

After that, usage should be "Just Javascript". You can safely access values
using any syntax you like, including desctructuring, and you can update values
using standard assignments.

```js
// Dot notation
const fullName = person.fullName;
// Destructuring
const { fullName } = person;
// Bracket notation for computed property names
const fullName = person['fullName'];

// Simple assignment
this.firstName = "Yehuda";
// Addition assignment (+=)
this.lastName += "Katz";
// Increment operator
this.age++;
```

#### Triggering Updates on Complex Objects

There may be cases where users want to update values in complex, untracked
objects such as arrays or POJOs. `@tracked` will only be usable with class
syntax at first, and while it may make sense to formalize these objects into
tracked classes in some cases, this will not always be the case.

To do this, users can re-set a tracked value directly after its inner values

> have been updated.

Reviewer: This is at odds with the development-mode error that you get when mutating an untracked property, as described above. Given that error, I think this only applies to array mutations or wholesale object replacement; you cannot mutate an object's property and then re-set its tracked value.

Author: Ah, that's a good point. Yeah I'll update this to note that it is just for arrays

```js
class SomeComponent extends Component {
  @tracked items = [];

  @action
  pushItem(item) {
    let { items } = this;

    items.push(item);

    this.items = items;
  }
}
```

### Interop with Legacy Systems

There are two cases, as discussed in the Detailed Design section, that we need
to consider when teaching interoperability:

> 1. Tracked getters accessing non-tracked properies and computeds

Reviewer: s/properies/properties/
